#+title: Nerd Food: Neurons for Computer Geeks - Part II: The Shocking Complexity of Electricity
#+options: date:nil toc:nil author:nil num:nil title:nil

In [[http://mcraveiro.blogspot.co.uk/2015/08/nerd-food-neurons-for-computer-geeks.html][part I]] we started to describe the basic morphology of the
neuron. In order to continue, we now need to take a detour around the
world of electricity. If you are an electricity nerd, I apologise in
advance; this is what happens when a computer scientist escapes into
your realm, I'm afraid.

* "Honor the charge they made!"

First and foremost, we need to understand the concept of /charge/. It
is almost a tautology that atoms are made up of "sub-atomic"
particles. These are the /proton/, the /neutron/ and the
/electron/. The neutron is not particularly interesting right now;
however the electron and the proton are, and all because they have a
magical property called /charge/. For our purposes, it suffices to
know that "charge" means that certain sub-atomic particles attract or
repeal each other, according to a well defined set of rules.

You can think of a charge as a property attached to the sub-atomic
particle, very much like a person has a weight or height, but with a
side-effect; it is as if this property makes people push or hug each
other when they are in close proximity, and they do so with the same
strength when at the same distance. This "strength" is the /electric
force/. How they decide whether to hug or push the next guy is based
on the "sign" of the charge - that is, positive or negative - with
respect to their own charge "sign". Positives push positives away but
hug negatives and vice-versa.

For whatever historical reasons, very clever people decided that an
electron has one negative unit of charge and a proton has a positive
unit of charge. The sign is, of course, rather arbitrary. We could
have just as well said that protons are red and electrons are blue or
some other suitably binary-like convention to represent these
permutations. Just because protons and electrons have the same charge,
it does not follow that they are similar in other respects. In fact,
they are _very_ different creatures. For example, the electron is very
"small" when compared to the proton - almost 2000 times "smaller". The
relevance of this "size" difference will become apparent later
on. Physicists call this "size" /mass/, by the by.

As it happens, all of these sub-atomic crazy critters are rather
minute entities. So small in fact that it would be really cumbersome
if we had to talk about charges in terms of the charge of an electron;
the numbers would just be too big and unwieldy. So, the very clever
people came up with a sensible way to bundle up the charges of the
sub-atomic particles in bigger numbers, much like we don't talk about
millimetres when measuring the distance to the Moon. However, unlike
the nice and logical metric system, with its neat use of the decimal
system, physicists came up instead with the /Coulomb/, or /C/, one
definition of which is:

- 1 Coloumb (1C) = 6.241 x 10^18 protons
- -1 Coloumb (-1C) = 6.241 x 10^18 electrons

This may sound like a /very/ odd choice - hey, why not just 1 x 10^20
or some other "round" number? - but just like a [[http://www.quora.com/Why-is-a-kilogram-equal-to-1000-grams-but-a-kilobyte-equals-1024-bytes][kilobyte is 1024 bytes
rather 1000]], this wasn't done by accident either. In fact, all related
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_System_of_Units][SI units]] were carefuly designed to work together and make calculations
as easy as possible.

Anyway, whenever you see =q= or =Q= in formulas it normally refers to
a charge in Coulombs.

* Units, Dimensions, Measures, Oh My!

Since we are on the subject of SI, this is probably a good point to
talk about units, dimensions, measurements, magnitudes, conversions
and other such exciting topics. Unfortunately, these are important to
understand how it all hangs together.

A number such as =1C= makes use of the SI /unit of measure/ "Coulomb"
and it exists in a /dimension/: the dimension of all units which can
talk about electric charges. This is very much in the same way we can
talk about time in seconds or minutes - we are describing points in
the time dimension, but using different /units of measure/ - or just
/units/, because we're lazy. A /measurement/ is the recording of a
quantity with a unit in a dimension. Of course, it would be too simple
to call it a "quantity", so instead physicists, mathematicians and the
like call it /magnitude/. But for the lay person, its not too bad an
approximation to replace "magnitude" with "quantity".

Finally, it is entirely possible to have /compound dimensional units/;
that is, one can have a unit of measure that refers to more than one
dimension, such as say "10 kilometres per second".

I won't discuss conversions just now, but you can easily imagine that
formulas that contain multiple units may provide ways to convert from
one unit to another. This will become relevant later on.

* Go With the Flow

Now we have a way of talking about charge, and now we know these
things can move - since they attract and repel each other - the next
logical thing is to start to imagine /current/. The name sounds
magical, but in reality it is akin to a current in a river: you are
just trying to figure out how much water is coming past you every
second (or in some other suitable unit in the time dimension). The
exact same exercise could be repeated for the number of cars going
past in a motorway or the number of runners across some imaginary
point in a track. For our electric purposes, current tells you how
many charges have zipped past over a period of time.

In terms of SI units, current is measured in /Amperes/, which have the
symbol /A/; an Ampere tells us how many Coloumbs have flown past in a
second. Whenever you see =I= in formulas it normally refers to
current.

Now lets see how these two things - Coulombs and Amperes - could work
together. Lets imagine an arbitrary "pipe" between two imaginary
locations, one side of which with a pile of positive charges and, on
the other side, a pile of negative charges - both measured in
Coulombs, naturally. In this /extraordinarily/ simplified and
non-existing world, the negative charges would "flow" down the pipe,
attracted by the positive charges. Because the positive charges are so
huge they won't budge, but the negative charges - the lighter
electrons - would zip across to meet them. The number of charges you
see going past in a time tick is the current.

* Resist!

Going back to our example of current in a river, one can imagine that
some surfaces are better at allowing water to flow than others; for
example, a river out in the open is a lot less "efficient" at flowing
than say a plastic pipe designed for that purpose. One reason is that
the river has to deal with twists and turns as it finds a path over
the landscape whereas the pipe could be laid out as straight as
possible; but it is also that the rocks and other elements of the
landscape slow down water, whereas a nice flat pipe would have no such
impediments. If one were to take these two extremes - a plastic pipe
designed for maximum water flow versus a landscape - one could see
that they affect flow differently; and one could be tempted to name
the property of "slowing down the flow" /resistance/, because it
describes how much "resistance" these things are offering to the
water. If you put up a barrier to avoid flooding, you probably would
want it to "resist" water quite a lot rather than allow it to flow;
and you can easily imagine that sand and sandbags "resist" water in
very different ways.

Resistance is a fundamental concept in the electrical world. The gist
of it is similar to the contrived examples above, in that not all
materials behave the same way with regards to allowing charges to
flow. Some allow them to flow freely nearly at maximum speed whereas
others do not allow them to flow at all.

Since we are dealing with physics, it is of course possible to measure
resistance. We do so in SI units of /Ohms/, denoted by the Greek
letter \omega.

As we shall see, not all materials are nicely behaved when it comes to
resistance.

* You've Got Potential Baby!

Lets return to our non-existing "pipe that allows charges to flow"
scenario, and take it one step further. Imagine that for whatever
reason our pipe becomes clogged up with a blockage somewhere in the
middle. Nothing could actually flow due to this blockage so our
current drops to zero.

According to the highly simplified rules that we have learned thus
far, we do know that - were there to be no blockage - there /would/ be
movement (current). That is, the setup of the two bundles in space is
such that, given the right conditions, we would start to see things
flowing. But, alas, we do not have the right conditions because the
pipe is blocked; hence no flow. You could say this setup has "the
potential" to get some flow going, if only we could fix the blockage.

In the world of electricity, this idea is captured by a few related
concepts. If we highly simplify them, they amount to this:

- /electric potential/: the idea that depending where you place a
  charge in space, it may have different "potential" to generate
  energy. We'll define energy a bit better latter on, but for now a
  layman's idea of it suffices. By way of an example: if you place a
  positive charge next to a lump of positive charges and let it go, it
  will move a certain distance away from the lump. Before you let the
  charge go, you know the charge has potential to move away. You can
  also see that the charge will move by different amounts depending
  how close you place it to the lump; the closer you place it, the
  more it will move. When we are thinking of electric potential, we
  think of just one charge.
- /electric potential energy/: clearly it would be possible to move
  two or three charges too, as we did for the one; and clearly they
  should produce more energy than a single charge. So one simple way
  of understanding electric potential energy is to think of it as the
  case of electric potential that deals with the total number of
  charges we're interested in, rather than just one.

Another way of imagining these two concepts is to think that electric
potential is a good way to measure things when you don't particularly
care about the number of charges involved; it is as if you scaled
everything to just one unit of charge. Electric potential energy is
more when you are thinking of a system with an actual number of
charges. But both concepts deal with the notion that placing a charge
at different points in space may have an impact in the energy you can
get out of it.

Having said all of that we can now start to think about /electric
potential difference/. It uses the same approach as electric
potential, in that everything is scaled to just one unit of charge,
but as the name implies, it provides a measurement of /the difference/
between the electric potential of two points. Electric potential
difference is more commonly known as /voltage/. Interestingly, it is
also known as /electric pressure/, and this may be the most meaningful
of its names; this is because when there is an electric potential
difference, it applies "pressure" on charges which force them to move.

The SI unit /Volt/ is used to measure electric potential, electric
potential energy and electric potential difference amongst other
things. This may sound a bit weird at first, but it is just because
one is unfamiliar with these concepts. Take /time/, for example: we
use minutes as a unit of measure of all sorts of things (duration of a
football game, time it takes for the moon to go around the earth,
etc.). We did not invent a new unit for each phenomenon because we
recognised - at some point - that we were dealing with points in the
same dimension.

* Quick Conceptual Mop-Up

Before we move over to the formulas, it may be best to tie up a few
loose ends. These are not strictly necessary, but just make the
picture a bit more complete and moves us to a more realistic model -
if still very simplistic.

First, we should start with atoms; we mentioned charges but skipped
them. Atoms are (mostly) a stable arrangement of charges, placed in
such a way that the atoms themselves are neutral - i.e. contain
exactly the same amount of negative and positive charges. We mentioned
before that protons and electrons don't really get along, and neutrons
are kind of just there, hanging around. In truth, neutrons and protons
also really get along, via the aptly named /nuclear force/; this is
what binds them together in the nucleus of the atom. Electrons are
attracted to protons and live their existences in a "cloud" around the
nucleus. Note that the nucleus is more than 99% of the mass of the
atom, which gives you an idea of just how small electrons are.

The materials we will deal with in our examples are made of atoms, as
are, well, quite a few things in the universe. These materials are
themselves stable arrangements of atoms, just like atoms are stable
arrangements of protons, neutrons and electrons. As you can see in the
picture, these look like lattices of some kind.

#+CAPTION: Microscopic View of Carbon Atoms. Source: [[https://sciencemonday.wordpress.com/2011/09/04/quantum-physics-the-brink-of-knowing-something-wonderful/][Quantum Physics: The Brink of Knowing Something Wonderful]]
[[https://sciencemonday.files.wordpress.com/2011/09/carbon-atoms.jpg]]

In practice, copper wires are made up of a great many things rather
than just atoms of copper. One such "kind of thing" is the /unbound
electrons/ - or free-moving electrons; basically electrons are not
trapped into an atom. As we mentioned before, electrons are the ones
doing most of the moving. Left to their own devices, electrons in a
conducting material will just move around, bumping into atoms in a
fairly random way. However, lets say you take one end of a copper wire
and plug it to the =+= side of a regular AA battery and then take
other end and plug it to the =-= side of the battery. According to all
we've just learned, its easy to imagine what will happen: the
electrons stored in the =-= side will zip across the copper to meet
their proton friends at the other end. This elemental construction,
with its circular path, is called a /circuit/. What you've done is to
upset the neutral balance of the copper wire, making all the electrons
to move in a coordinated way (rather than random) from the =-= side to
the =+= side.

It is at this juncture that we must introduce the concept of ions. An
/ion/ is basically an atom that is no longer neutral - either because
it has more protons than electrons (called a /cation/) or more
electrons than protons (called an /anion/). In either case, this comes
about because the atom has gained or lost some electrons. Ions will
become of great interest when we return to the neuron.

One final word on resistance and its sister concept of /conductance/:

- /Resistance/ is in effect a [[http://education.jlab.org/qa/current_02.html][byproduct of the way the electrons are
  arranged in the electron cloud]] and is related to the ionisation
  mentioned above; certain arrangements just don't allow electrons to
  flow across.
- /Conductance/ is the inverse of resistance. When you talk about
  resistance you are focusing on the material's ability to impair
  movement of charges; when you talk about conductance you are
  focusing on the material's ability to let charge flow through.

The reason we choose copper or other metals for our examples is
because they are good at /conducting/ these pesky electrons.

* Ohm's Law

We have now introduced all the main actors required for one of the
main parts in the play: Ohm's Law. It can be stated very easily:

: V = R x I

And here's a picture to aid intuition.

#+CAPTION: Source: [[http://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/161650/could-someone-intuitively-explain-to-me-ohms-law][Could someone intuitively explain to me Ohm's law?]]
http://i.stack.imgur.com/4KhUg.jpg

The best way to understand this law is to create a simple circuit.

#+CAPTION: Simple electrical circuit. Source: Wikipedia, [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_network][Electrical network]]
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b4/Ohm%27s_Law_with_Voltage_source_TeX.svg

On the left we have a voltage source, which could be our 1.5V AA
battery. On the right of the diagram we have a /resistor/ - an
electric component that is designed specifically to "control" the flow
of the electric current. Without the resistor, we would be limited by
how much current the battery can pump out and how much "natural"
resistance the copper wire has, which is not a lot since it is very
good at conducting. The resistor gives us a way to limit current flow
from these theoretical maximum limitations.

Even if you are not particularly mathematically oriented, you can
easily see that Ohm's Law gives us a nice way to find any of these
three variables, given the other two. That is to say:

: R = V / I
: I = V / R

These tell us many interesting things such that, for the same
resistance, current increases as the voltage increases. For good
measure, we can also find out the conductance too:

: G = I / V = 1 / R

It is important to notice that not everything obeys Ohm's law -
i.e. behave in a straight line. The conductors that obey this law are
called /ohmic conductors/. Those that do not are called /non-ohmic
conductors/. There are also things that obey to Ohm's Law, for the
most part. These are called /quasi-ohmic/.

** What next?

We have already run out of time for this instalment but there are
still some more fundamental electrical concepts we need to
discuss. The next part will finish these and start to link them back
to the neuron.
